# HTML Event
- HTML events are things that happen to HTML elements.

- Examples of events:

    - An HTML button is clicked
    - A web page has finished loading
    - The mouse moves over an element
    - A keyboard key is pressed
    - An HTML input field is changed

- syntax
> <_element_ _eventName_ = 'Javascript or function'>

- we can change by writing ***this.innerHTML = _function()_***

## common HTML event
- onchange
- onclick
- onmouseover
- onmouseout
- onkeydown
- onload

## Javascript Event Handlers

- An event handler is JavaScript code that runs when an event happens.

- Event handlers can be used to handle and verify user input, user actions, and browser actions:

    - Things that should be done every time a page loads
    - Things that should be done when the page is closed
    - Action that should be performed when a user clicks a button
    - Content that should be verified when a user inputs data
    - And more ...
- Many different methods can be used to let JavaScript work with events:

    - HTML event attributes can execute JavaScript code directly
    - HTML event attributes can call JavaScript functions
    - You can assign your own event handler functions to HTML elements
    - You can prevent events from being sent or being handled
    - And more ...

- ***using Event listner***
    - using _addEventListener()_ is the recommended way to handle events.
    - by using these, we can keep HTML and Javascript separated.

## JavaScript Mouse Event
- Mouse events happen when the user interacts with the mouse.
- some common mouse events:
    - click
    - dblclick
    - mouseover / mouseout
    - mousemove
    - mousedown / mouseup
    - mouseenter
    - mouseleave
    - contextmenu
    - wheel : scrolling or zooming
    - dragevents

- Mouse events are crucial for creating interactive web pages and applications, triggering specific functions in response to user actions like mouse clicks, scrolls, and movements.
```
<div id="box"
style="width:200px;height:100px;padding:16px;border:1px solid #000;">
Move mouse over this box!
</div>

<script>
const box = document.getElementById("box");

//mouseover
box.addEventListener("mouseover", function(){
  box.innerHTML = "Move mouse is inside the box!";
});

//mouseout
box.addEventListener("mouseout", function(){
box.innerHTML = "mouse is outside the box";
});

</script>
```

### Mouse Position
 - if we want to know the pointer position in coordinates

 ```
<p id="demo">Move the mouse in this window!</p>

<script>
// Let document listen for mousemove
document.addEventListener("mousemove", function (event) {
  document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML =
  "X: " + event.clientX + " Y: " + event.clientY;
});
</script>
 ```

 ## JavaScript Keyboard Events
 - happens when the user presses a key on the keyboard
    - keydown
    - keyup
    - keypress : deprecated not recommended

- to check which key is pressed
 ```
<input id="k" type="text" placeholder="Press a key here!">

<p id="demo"></p>

<script>
const k = document.getElementById("k");

// Let k listen for keydown
k.addEventListener("keydown", function (event) {
  document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = "You pressed: " + event.code; // use event.key and check the difference
});
</script>
 ```

 > Note: You can also detect modifier keys using properties like event.ctrlKey, event.shiftKey, event.altKey, and event.metaKey to implement key combinations (e.g., Ctrl + S).

## Javascript Load Events
- Load Events happen when the browser has finished an element.
- two most important load events:
    - DOMContentLoaded (when HTML is ready)
    - load (waits for pages, images, CSS,etc.)

- DOMContentLoaded
    - The DOMContentLoaded event fires when the browser has fully loaded the HTML and built the Document Object Model (DOM) tree, but has not necessarily finished loading external resources like images and stylesheets.

    - The DOMContentLoaded event is best for initializing the user interface, attaching event handlers, and performing actions that only require the DOM to be ready.
```
    document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", function () {
         document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = "HTML is loaded!";
         });
```
- Window Load
    - The load event fires when the entire page has fully loaded, including all dependent resources such as images, stylesheets, and sub-frames.

    - The load event is best for actions that require all resources available, such as getting the dimensions of an image or checking the browser type.

```
<script>
// Add Event Listener to window
window.addEventListener("load", function () {
  document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = "Page is fully loaded!";
});
</script>
```

## Javascript Timing Events
- Timing Events let us run code:
    - after a delay
    - or repeatedly

    Timing is driven by Timing Events generated by the system clock.

### Timer Function
- setTimeOut()  : sets a clock timeout(runs once)
- setInterval() : sets a clock interval(runs repeatedly)
- clearTimeout() : clears a timeout
- clearInterval() : clears an interval
- setTimeout() is the same as window.setTimeout().
- clock:
```
<p id="demo"></p>

<script>

setInterval(showTime, 1000);


function showTime(){
 const time = new Date();
 document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = time.getHours() + " : " + time.getMinutes() + " : " + time.getSeconds();

}
```

## Javascript Event Management
- Event Management is about adding, removing, and controlling events.

    - addEventListener() : will add the event
    - removeEventListener() : will remove the event from listening, to remove an event listener, you must use the same named function you used to add it.

 ### Blocking Events
 - event.preventDefault() stops the browser’s default behavior for a given event.
- Every browser event has built‑in default actions:

    - Clicking a link → navigates to another page
    - Submitting a form → reloads the page
    - Clicking a checkbox → toggles checked state
    - Right‑click → opens context menu

- preventDefault() tells the browser:“Don’t do what you normally do. I’ll handle this myself.”
-Syntax 
```
var.addEventListener("click", function(event){
    event.preventDefault();
    //code
})
```
---
### _onload_ & _onunload_ Events

- The onload and onunload events are triggered when the user enters or leaves the page.

- The onload event can be used to check the visitor's browser type and browser version, and load the proper version of the web page based on the information.

- The onload and onunload events can be used to deal with cookies.

### _oninput_ Events
- it is often used to do some action while the user input data.
```
    <label for="name"> Name: 
    <input id="name" placeholder="Enter your name" oninput="upperCase()">
```

### _onchange_ Events
- it is often used in combination with validation of input fields
- when we type or select something and if we losses focus means if we click somewhere else of the window then at that time this event will occur

### Javascript _eventListener_

- ***addEventListener()***
    - The addEventListener() method attaches an event handler to the specified element.

    - The addEventListener() method attaches an event handler to an element without overwriting existing event handlers.

    - You can add many event handlers to one element.

    - You can add many event handlers of the same type to one element, i.e two "click" events.

    - You can add event listeners to any DOM object not only HTML elements. i.e the window object.

    - The addEventListener() method makes it easier to control how the event reacts to bubbling.

    - When using the addEventListener() method, the JavaScript is separated from the HTML markup, for better readability and allows you to add event listeners even when you do not control the HTML markup.

    - You can easily remove an event listener by using the removeEventListener() method.

- Syntax:
    > element.addEventListener(event, function, useCapture);

    - useCapture is an boolean value an optional, specifying whether to use event bubbling or event capturing

#### Event Bubbling or Event Capturing?
- There are two ways of event propagation in the HTML DOM, bubbling and capturing.

- Event propagation is a way of defining the element order when an event occurs. If you have a <p> element inside a <div> element, and the user clicks on the <p> element, which element's "click" event should be handled first?

- In bubbling the inner most element's event is handled first and then the outer: the <p> element's click event is handled first, then the <div> element's click event.

- In capturing the outer most element's event is handled first and then the inner: the <div> element's click event will be handled first, then the <p> element's click event.

- With the addEventListener() method you can specify the propagation type by using the "useCapture" parameter:

>addEventListener(event, function, useCapture);
- The default value is false, which will use the bubbling propagation, when the value is set to true, the event uses the capturing propagation.
  



